offprint from

Lingua Aegyptia
Studia Monographica
Herausgegeben von
Frank Kammerzell, Gerald Moers und Kai Widmaier

Band 9

Institut für Archäologie
Humboldt Universität
Berlin

Widmaier Verlag
Hamburg

Institut für Ägyptologie
Universität Wien
Wien

copies of this volume may be ordered from the publisher (orders@widmaier-verlag.de)
and the North American distributor Eisenbrauns (www.eisenbrauns.com)

Lexical Semantics
in Ancient Egyptian

Eitan Grossman, Stéphane Polis & Jean Winand (eds.)

Widmaier Verlag ∙ Hamburg
2012

Titelaufnahme:
Eitan Grossman, Stéphane Polis & Jean Winand (eds.)
Lexical Semantics in Ancient Egyptian
Hamburg: Widmaier Verlag, 2012
(Lingua Aegyptia — Studia Monographica; Bd. 9)
ISSN 0946-8641
ISBN 978-3-943955-09-5

© Widmaier Verlag, Kai Widmaier, Hamburg 2012
Das Werk, einschließlich aller seiner Teile, ist urheberrechtlich geschützt.
Jede Verwertung außerhalb der engen Grenzen des Urheberrechtsgesetzes ist ohne Zustimmung
des Verlages unzulässig und strafbar. Das gilt insbesondere für Vervielfältigungen, Übersetzungen,
Mikroverfilmungen und die Einspeicherung und Verarbeitung in elektronischen Systemen.
Gedruckt auf säurefreiem, archivierfähigem Papier.
Druck und Verarbeitung: Hubert & Co., Göttingen
Printed in Germany

CONTENTS
Lexical semantics in Ancient Egyptian. An introduction
Eitan Grossman & Stéphane Polis .......................................................................1-15
What are “Determinatives” good for?
Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald...............................................................17-53
Egyptian classifiers at the interface of lexical semantics and pragmatics
Eliese-Sophia Lincke & Frank Kammerzell ....................................................55-112
Motivated sign formation in Hieroglyphic Egyptian
and German Sign Language (DGS).
Towards a typology of iconic signs in visual linguistic systems
Eliese-Sophia Lincke & Silvia Kutscher .......................................................113-140
Prototype structures and conceptual metaphor.
Cognitive Approaches to Lexical Semantics in Ancient Egyptian
Rune Nyord ....................................................................................................141-174
Navigating polyfunctionality in the lexicon.
Semantic maps and Ancient Egyptian lexical semantics
Eitan Grossman & Stéphane Polis .................................................................175-225
Discourse markers between grammar and lexicon.
Two Ancient Egyptian cases for (de)grammaticalization?
Elsa Oréal.......................................................................................................227-245
A diachronic approach to the syntax and semantics of
Egyptian spatio-temporal expressions with HA-t ‘front’.
Implications for cognition and metaphor
Camilla Di Biase-Dyson ................................................................................247-292
Ancient Egyptian Prepositions for the Expression of Spatial Relations
and their Translations. A typological approach
Daniel Werning ..............................................................................................293-346
Spatial frames of reference in Egyptian.
Diachronic evidence for Left/Right patterns
Matthias Müller..............................................................................................347-378

vi

Contents

To clothe or to wipe. On the semantics of the verb nms
Joachim Friedrich Quack ...............................................................................379-386
Le verbe gm(j) : essai de sémantique lexicale
Pascal Vernus.................................................................................................387-438
Le verbe de perception nw(A) en égyptien ancien.
Étude de sémantique lexicale
Alessandro Stella ...........................................................................................439-458
Le verbe et les variations d’actance.
Les constructions réversibles (= Études valentielles, 2)
Jean Winand...................................................................................................459-486

Grossman, Polis & Winand (eds.), Lexical Semantics in Ancient Egyptian, 17-53

What are “Determinatives” good for?
Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald (Craig), Jerusalem – Lyon

Abstract
This article attempts to answer the question: why did the Egyptian script keep a cumbersome and, in
principle, unnecessary system of multi-determinatives for more than 3000 years? Almost every word in
the script is followed by a few additional “mute” hieroglyphs (hieroglyphs that are not to be pronounced) that provided additional information about the word. As the Egyptian script is first and foremost a communication system, the question to be raised is: what are the “gains” brought by the use of
these determinatives into this system that contributed to their retention and extensive usage for
thousands of years on the “communication market.” We contend that the conservative answers given in
Egyptology are insufficient. The answers to these questions can be found through redefining “determinatives” as “classifiers” that operate as a “classifier system” analogous to such systems in oral
languages. Moreover, being of a different medium — script and not speech — the Egyptian multiclassifier word offers the reader a rich array of additional data, unavailable even to other classifier
languages.

0 Introduction
Almost every word in the Egyptian hieroglyphic script ends with one or more “mute”
graphemes (as a rule, unpronounced signs), which are frequently referred to in the
scientific literature as “determinatives.” Note the three examples:
“Sinuhe”1

Personal name, male

“Meret”2

Personal name, female

“horse”3

For many decades, the explanation in Egyptology for the existence of these so–called
“determinatives” was that they were just “reading aids.” The determinatives were said

1
2
3

Our ongoing joint research was made possible largely through the financial and scientific support
of the EU project COST A31 Stability and adaptation of classification systems in a cross-cultural
perspective, chaired by Thekla Wiebusch (CRLAO, CNRS-EHESS-INALCO). We are grateful to
Eitan Grossman, Hebrew University, and Niv Allon, Yale University, for reading the manuscript
and making very useful comments. Thanks also to Dan Elharrar, Hebrew University, for his
invaluable assistance in preparing this article.
Blackman 1932: 37. The meaning of the name is “Son of the Sycamore.” The
sign is also a
“determinative,” referring to the generic category of trees [TREE/WOOD]; see Goldwasser 2002: 3955.
Parkinson 1991: 1a. The sign
is also a “determinative” relating to the meaning of the name mrt
“the beloved,” see below, n. 38.
DZA 28.723.000 (18th dynasty, stela). On the “determinative” [HIDE & TAIL], see Appendix below, n. 129.

18

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

to both signal the end of the word, and to indicate “the general idea of the word.”4 It
was thought that “determinatives” were introduced to compensate for the lack of
vowels and word divisions in the Egyptian writing system. This opinion is still held
by most Egyptologists and linguists today.5
While this justification for the existence of determinatives may hold some weight,
we contend that it is insufficient. Although, this theory may explain the initial impetus
for the creation of determinatives, it cannot explain their survival and long-lasting
“success” in the Egyptian script system for over three thousand years.
Moreover, the student of Egyptology, who interprets the birth of determinatives as
the result of an effort to dispel ambiguity within the vowel-less script system, should
be reminded that past and present alphabetic Semitic scripts function well as writing
systems, although these are (in most cases) purely consonantal, and the correct
reading of words can be reached only through their con-textual and co-textual
information.6
Thus, evidence suggests that determinatives were not indispensable. Moreover,
considering that one determinative could have easily performed the task of indicating
both the “end” and the “general idea” of the word, the rich and lively development of
the “multi-determinative” word in Egyptian certainly requires an explanation. Moreover, some words never take a determinative (see discussion below), and in some
cases because of considerations of space determinatives are simply avoided.
In this article, we will (§1) review some of the arguments from the last decade for
considering determinatives as classifiers; (§2) go beyond the study of the semantics of
Egyptian classifiers, and address a new research question as yet unanswered in Egyptology: what are determinatives — now taken as classifiers — good for? This question
has been addressed in the literature on general classifier studies and is now being
brought into the field of Egyptology. In §3, we will analyze the encyclopedic, discourse-pragmatic, and grammatical information carried by classifiers. We will then
discuss in §4 the “grammar” of the multi-classifier word and compare it to wellknown linguistic phenomena recognized in many languages of the world. In §5, we
will summarize the discussion and review the advantages of classifiers to the
communication system, and lastly (§6) we will present the relevance of research on
the Egyptian classifier system for general linguistics. A short appendix by Grinevald
will introduce the reader to the world of classifier languages.
4

5
6

See, for example, the standard grammars of Ancient Egyptian, e.g., Gardiner 31957: 31 & passim;
Allen 2000: 3; Schenkel 1990: 49-51. For the history of “determinative” studies in Egyptology, see
Goldwasser 2006a. The most thorough analysis of the “determinative” phenomenon in the Egyptological literature before this decade was done by Champollion 1836; however, this part of his
legacy is often forgotten in Egyptology.
This argument can even be found in the latest discussions on the Egyptian script system,
e.g. Stauder 2010: 137-148.
The written word ʸʴʱ s-p-r in Modern Hebrew shows only root consonants. This word bears at
least six possible meanings: book, barber, (he) counted, (he) told, (he) cut [hair], (it) was told. The
reader can only reach the intended meaning through context; see Goldwasser forthcoming. One
should also note that words derived from a single root often display the same classifier, which
shows that the role of classifier as kind of matres lectionis is rather limited (we are grateful to Jean
Winand for this comment).

What are “Determinatives” good for?

19

1 Determinatives as classifiers: recent research and new questions
Recent studies have argued that determinatives are not hieroglyphs signifying associations and connotations that represent extra-linguistic data, but in fact constitute an
interesting case of a classification system. While other types of classification systems,
such as gender systems, are characterized by systematic agreement patterns (between
noun and article, adjective, or participle), the characteristics of a classifier is that it
consists of an extra morpheme, occurring once in a certain construction, carrying
information that should be interpreted together with the word it classifies.
The relationship between a word and its classifier is generally semantically
motivated, the semantic link being a taxonomic, or sometimes meronymic connection,
although, during the evolution of systems, a classifier can lose some or all of its
semantic content. Therefore, the term classifier must not be taken literally, because a
classifier does not always literally classify, but the majority of classifiers do relate
semantically to the word to which they are linked. Of interest here is that classifiers
constitute grammatical systems, now known as classifier systems in the linguistic
literature, in the same way other systems are known as gender systems.
A striking parallelism is found between written classifiers in Egyptian and noun
classifiers in Jakaltek Popti’, an Amerindian language of the Mayan family. In the
Jakaltek Popti’ language, a free word – a classifier – obligatorily precedes referential
nouns.7 Three of these twenty-four classifiers of Jakaltek Popti’ are shown below —
[WOMAN], [MAN] and [ANIMAL] are classifiers (CLs):
Xil
ix
malin naj
pel b’oj no’
cheh
Saw [WOMAN] Malin [MAN] Pel with [ANIMAL] horse
‘Malin saw Pel with the horse’

1.1 First definition of determinatives as classifiers
Noel Rude was the first to suggest, twenty five years ago, in a short (5-page) article,8
the similarities between hieroglyphic and cuneiform determinatives on the one hand,
and oral language classifiers, on the other. Fifteen years later, Goldwasser provided
the theoretical demonstration that supported Rude’s thesis, in the book Prophets,
Lovers and Giraffes.9
In several other publications over the last decade, Goldwasser has shown that the
many types of semantic relations which exist between “determinatives” and nouns in
Egyptian have exact parallels in the oral classifier systems of different languages.10
Other students of the Jerusalem School have added to this research via studies
focusing on specific classifiers. 11 The Berlin school, headed by Kammerzell, 12 has
made many important theoretical contributions to the understanding of the semantics
of classifiers and has introduced an exciting new era in the study of verb classifiers.

7
8
9
10
11
12

There are also classifier systems in which the classifier appears after the noun.
Rude 1986: 133-138.
Goldwasser 2002.
Especially in Goldwasser 2006a.
E.g. Shalomi-Hen 2006; David 2000. On the classifier, see Goldwasser 2010.
See Lincke 2011.

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

20

1.1.1 “Echo classifiers” in the script: Repeaters and unique classifiers
In the abovementioned studies, special attention has been given to “echo classifiers,”13
known in the oral classifiers literature as “repeaters.”14 This type of determinative has
long stood as a barrier between Egyptologists and the realization that “determinatives”
are actually classifiers. Echo classifiers are a common phenomenon in the Egyptian
script, such as, for example, in the orthography of the word “locust” snHm
, where the [LOCUST] classifier pictorially repeats the phonetic 15
information given by the preceding hieroglyphs. The locust classifier is a “repeater”
as well as a “unique” 16 classifier because no other word is classified by the icon
.
Conversely, in spelling of the word “woman” Hmt
, the last hieroglyph is a
“repeater” classifier, as it pictorially repeats the phonetic information given by the
previous signs, “woman,” but it is not a “unique” classifier, since many words pertaining to female occupations can take this [FEMALE] classifier.17
As evidenced in the appendix below, these types of classifiers, which involve no
real “classification” process, are present in oral classifier systems as well. They are
semantically motivated, but add very little or no additional information to the word
they classify. As in the case of Egyptian graphemes, classifier scholars find it difficult
to define their “raison d’être.”

1.2 The “text approach”: Frequency and density in a single text
Grinevald 18 has demonstrated that Egyptian determinatives constitute a system,
comparable to oral language classifiers, in that they exhibit regularities and obey
rules. Her argument was based on a method of textual analysis familiar to field
linguists who want to establish the grammar of as yet un-described languages, and
demonstrate the existence of a specific system.
As a test case, Grinevald analyzed the determinatives occurring in “The Great
Hymn to the Aten,” a long text from the reign of Akhenaten in the New Kingdom.19
Her analysis clearly showed that “determinatives” bore characteristics of a welldeveloped system. The determinatives were observed to appear with regular frequency, with about the same density, for any portion of the text, and to obey specific
rules of use. Structurally, the determinatives were found to be regularly attached to
13 Senft 2000; Allan 1977: 295, and Appendix below.
14 For repeaters in Egyptian, see Goldwasser 2002: 15; Goldwasser 2006a: 21-22; Kammerzell
forthcoming.
15 For the term “phonetic” in this article, see below, n. 62.
16 For “repeater” and “unique” classifiers, see the appendix at the end of this article.
17 Unlike the classifier the [LOCUST] classifier may also be used as a logogram. However the [MALE
(HUMAN)] classifier can be used as a repeater but also as a logogram.
18 Presented by Grinevald and Goldwasser at the COST A31 conference: “The Boundaries of
Classification: Definitions, Processes and Adaptability,” University of Kent, Canterbury, UK, 1518 September 2008, publication in preparation.
19 Davies & Ricci 1908: pl. XXVII. Other texts of similar lengths from the New Kingdom show
similar results.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

21

root lexemes, and, for the most part, to precede suffixes such as tense or person
markers (such as the past tense marker n in sDm.n.f formations, see below). The determinatives of the text could, therefore, be argued to constitute a rule-governed system
in contrast to how they are traditionally described in the Egyptological literature — as
marking associations or connotations, or even as a playful “game of icons.”20
Once the fact that determinatives constitute a rule-governed system of classifiers
is established, the systematic comparison of this Egyptian system with the wellknown linguistic phenomenon of classifiers becomes very productive, revealing striking similarities between these “mute” graphemic determinatives and classifier systems
found in hundreds of languages from around the world.

1.3 The “theater of the verb” — verb classifiers
A first discussion of “verb classifiers” as a possible separate category with a different
function in the script system was already offered by Jean Winand in his book Temps
et aspect en égyptien.21 In a ground-breaking study focusing on verb classification,
Kammerzell22 demonstrated how the classifier system visually encodes semantic relations of the Egyptian verb. In doing so, these classifiers open a new window through
which prototypical “event schemata” in written Egyptian could be observed. We shall
return to this topic below.

1.4 The new research question: What are “determinatives” good for?
The title of this article is, in fact, a paraphrase of the title of a pioneering article in
classifier studies by Denny in 197623 entitled “What are noun classifiers good for?”
Denny’s basic answer was that classifiers are independent elements whose semantic
function is to place objects in classes relating to how humans interact with the world.
This interaction could be social, physical or functional.24 Included in the social realm
are animate entities, fellow human beings — classified by gender, and/or social rank
— and culture-specific entities such as divinities. A classification by physical interaction is based on the physical characteristics of tangible objects, such as their shape
and consistency (long, flat, round; rigid or flexible), while a classification by functional interaction reveals how these objects are used by humans (for example, for
food, transportation, adornment, instruments).
Previous works on Egyptian classifiers concentrated on the semantic relations
between classifier and word, and on the reconstruction of the Egyptian knowledge
system (classes or categories) as evidenced through the collection of words that take
the same classifier, which unveils the ancient Egyptian world organization. These
studies showed that Denny’s answer proves to be correct for Egyptian graphemic
classifiers as well.
However, due to the “longue durée” and constant development of the classifier
system within the script, we argue that there were additional benefits in using such a
20
21
22
23
24

E.g. Gardiner 31957; Vernus 1983: 77; Schenkel 1990.
Winand 2006: 46-47.
Kammerzell forthcoming. On the verb classifiers in the Pyramid Texts, see Lincke 2011.
See Denny 1976 & 1986.
Denny 1976: 125.

22

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

system, which might warrant its lasting persistence within Egyptian culture. One
exceptional phenomenon is the survival of the multi-classifier word, some examples
of which exhibit three or more classifiers for one lexeme, creating a seemingly
cumbersome and communication-stalling system.
In this paper we further examine Denny’s question. We will try to identify and
describe the operations of Egyptian classifiers on the reader (beyond the already discussed categorization processes). We believe that once we demonstrate the different
levels on which classifiers operate, we will better understand the cognitive and
informational benefits that have sustained the classifier system for so long — we will
understand the reasons for its cultural “success.”

2 The kinds of information provided by Egyptian classifiers
Let us analyze the information that classifiers provide to the reader as belonging to
different domains. We have identified three main domains of information:
– The first domain of information to be considered is of an encyclopedic nature. If we
consider that every lexeme is in reality a complex “knowledge frame”, and that each
word evokes cultural prototypes, then the role of classifiers is to direct the reader to a
more explicit referent, by providing a wide range of encyclopedic information about
it. For instance, within the “noun universe,”25 the classifier may provide information
such as gender, social status, animacy, material, or shape; and for verbs, the classifier
may provide information about event schemata and the nature of its arguments.
Culture-specific knowledge may also emerge through the classification system.26
– Another level of information, discourse-pragmatic in nature, stems from the fact
that scribes often had choices between several classifiers and combinations of classifiers. These options are usually traditional alternatives for the word’s classifiers, but
in rare cases we may find the introduction of a discourse-specific classifier. Thus, the
selected classifiers provide additional information about specific referents at the time
of discourse, such as who is talking, with regards to what specifically, and with what
attitude or intention.27
– Finally, classifiers can provide grammatical information. For instance, they can
indicate where a root or stem ends and where a suffix starts.28 Classifiers can also
mark derivational processes, such as deriving a noun from a verb, or syntactic
boundaries, such as the end of a relative clause.

We shall also try to account for the cases where no additional semantic information is
given, either because the classifiers are “phonetic classifiers” with no overt semantic
relevance, or when words remain unclassified.

25 Defined as such by Givón 2001: 7-8.
26 E.g. on the crocodile
classifier as a culture-bound classifier, see Goldwasser 1995: 103-106.
On the Seth classifier and its reflection of cultural and religious changes in the New Kingdom, see
Allon; see also Goldwasser 2010.
27 E.g. The verb rx “to know” when referring to “knowing a woman” in the Biblical sense, may be
written with the phallus classifier [instrument]
(DZA 26.029.740 and 26.029.670).
28 For root structure in Egyptian, see Reintges 1994; Brein 2009: 3; Vernus 2009.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

23

2.1 Encyclopedic information
We now turn to a few examples of encyclopedic information given by Egyptian
classifiers, first in nouns, then in verbs.
2.1.1 Encyclopedic information in Egyptian nouns
In many cases, the classifier directs the reader to specific aspects of the knowledge
structure, and the end product of the reading process is a “high-lighted” frame of
knowledge. In many cases, this extra information relays socio-cultural or institutional
perceptions. This knowledge is attached to individual nouns themselves and is usually
not context-sensitive.
For example, in the word “widow”
,29 the two classifiers (last two
signs) highlight two aspects of “widowhood.” The first,
[HAIR], a metonymic
classifier, is a cultural referent referring the reader to mourning rituals in ancient
Egypt, in which women’s hair played an important role.30 The second classifier refers
to a universal generic classification of the widow, which is not culture-bound but a
universal semantic ‘feature’ of the lexeme “widow”; i.e. a “widow” ‘is a kind’ of
[FEMALE].31 This classifier functions, in a way, like a female gender marker32.
33
In another spelling of the word
the
[HAIR] classifier is
replaced with the
“BAD BIRD”, while the same gender classifier is used at the end.
This classifier
, which originally designated the category [SMALL], acquired the
extended meaning [NEGATIVE] from the Middle Kingdom onwards. Kammerzell correctly defined the use of this classifier in the New Kingdom as “a non-iconic classifier
constituting a hyper-category of events and states which were regarded as negative or
undesirable.”34 In the case of the word “widow”, the use of the [NEGATIVE] classifier
appears to signal the social judgment in Egyptian society that widowhood is a ‘negative’ state.35
On a more encyclopedic level, attested from the Old Kingdom onwards, classifiers
may depict units that comprise an entity considered a collective noun, thus, actually

“dismantling” it. For instance, the word “people”

rmT is classified by

[MALE] and
[FEMALE], the components that make up “people”; the classifiers are
always written in this order, reflecting the basic gender priority of Egyptian society.36
29 DZA 28.191.180, Middle Kingdom.
classifier, e.g. sAmt “mourning” and iAkb “to
30 A few other words related to mourning take the
mourn” (Gardiner 31957: 588 & 450).
31 Reflection of the cultural code and the “politically correct” in script was discussed in detail in
Goldwasser 1995 & 2002.
32 In Late Egyptian, when the gender marker -t is not written systematically, the classifier is sometimes the only way to decide on the gender of a noun (p.c. Jean Winand).
33 Faulkner 1962: 184.
34 Kammerzell forthcoming. On this classifier in the Old Kingdom, see David 2000.
can be found also in this spelling of the verb msdd
35 A social-cultural judgment
“hate” (Urk. IV, 758,9).
order is known to us, see Goldwasser 2002: 22, note 63
36 A single example of the reversed
(Old Kingdom).

24

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

Another interesting example is the collective noun
mnmnt “herd.” In
this example, the classifier represents the prototypical animal which comprises a herd.
On a papyrus from the 18th Dynasty is an outstanding example of the word “herd”
taking no less than 5 classifiers (!):37

2.1.2 Encyclopedic information in Egyptian verbs and deverbals
A particularly interesting characteristic of Egyptian classifiers is that they are also
applied to verbs, and, in fact, provide more information about the structure of verbal
events than oral classifier systems are known to do.38
If a noun is a static universe, then verbs present event schema. 39 The event
schema, “the theater of the verb”, specifies the number and nature of its arguments,
such as agent, patient, theme, instrument, or location, etc. For instance, ‘running’
involves an agent, while ‘eating’ involves an agent and a patient; ‘cutting’ involves an
agent, a patient and an instrument, while ‘putting’ involves an agent, a theme and a
location. A characteristic feature of the Egyptian classifier system is that the classifiers of a verb (and of a nominalized verb form — a deverbal) may present (in the
pictorial alone) any one of or a combination of its prototypical arguments.40
41
So, for example, the verb swr
“to drink,” in this spelling, takes
two classifiers: one representing a prototypical [patient] of the act of drinking,

[WATER]

, and one representing the [actor/action]

.42

The verb wHa
“to fowl” reflects a specific life-style in the marshes of
the Nile. In this activity, well-known from reliefs and paintings in tombs from the Old
Kingdom onwards, the fowler targets both fish and water-fowl. This specific situation
is well-documented through the classifier system, where the verb “to fowl” gets two
prototypical patients:

[BIRD], and

[FISH], as we see above. The third classi-

fier is an [actor/action] classifier (see discussion of this word below §4.1.1). Intransitive verbs may also show two arguments.
An interesting example is the verb sDr “to sleep.” Since the Old Kingdom it
regularly takes the classifier
which may be understood as a pictorial repeater.
P. Boulaq 17, 6,7 = Luiselli 2004: 64. Also Goldwasser 2002: 74(18th Dynasty).
On the role of classifiers in determining the verbal Aksionsart, already Winand 2006: 45-47
See Van Valin 2001: 22-33; also Rappaport Hovav, Doron & Sichel 2010.
See Kammerzell forthcoming and Lincke 2011. On classifiers as prototypes, see Goldwasser 2002:
25-38.
41 DZA 20.553.790, Middle Kingdom. In earlier examples, this verb may take a [CUP] classifier,
which represents the [instrument].
42 For the identification of the classifier
as the pictorial manifestation of the conceptual metaphor
[THE BODY IS A CONTAINER], see Goldwasser 2005: 111 & 2006b: 476 n. 2 (with bibliography).
The words that take this classifier encompasses food, feelings, thoughts, and ideas — all supposedly residing within the “human container,” compare Lakoff & Johnson 1980: 46 & 50.

37
38
39
40

What are “Determinatives” good for?

25

However the sign
actually combines two arguments, the [agent] and the typical,
prestige, [instrument] — the bed. However, in not a few examples in New Kingdom
literary (hieratic) texts we find a development of two differentiated arguments as
classifiers —

, i.e. [instrument] – [BED] and an agent, the [actor/action] classi-

43

fier. It seems that the hieroglyph
was understood as “bed” alone. Like the
[BIRD] and [FISH], the [BED] acts as a prototypical vehicle. It appears, for example, in
sentences where the protagonist is described sleeping under a tree or in the street. The
verb may also present a typical combination of three classifiers

in Ramesside

44

hieratic. The second classifier in this combination may be an extension of the bed,
standing for [CLOTH] or the like.

2.2 Discourse-pragmatic information in Egyptian classifiers
In addition to classifiers expressing encyclopedic knowledge at the word level, there
are many situations where Egyptian classifiers offer discourse-pragmatic rather than
lexical information, exhibiting the process of “referent tracking” of particular
referents.45
For instance, a word that is usually classified by a

[MALE] classifier, such as

the word “brother,” can instead be written with a
[DIVINE] classifier, informing
the reader that the brother being mentioned is a god.46 Two representative examples
are given below.
2.2.1 Tracking a specific referent in a discourse — “tracking the enemy”
An illuminating example of the “referent tracking” process, found in the hieroglyphic
autobiographical text of the 18th Dynasty, is illustrated briefly in sequence (1) below.
Although the unmarked classifier for personal names (1a) and for the word “crew”
(1c) should be
[MALE], in this particular case, the person named and the crew
involved happen to be enemies of the Egyptians. Thus, in a context-sensitive manner,
the unmarked classifier
is substituted with the hieroglyph “dead enemy”
,
which represents the prototypical and ideal state of an enemy in Egyptian culture.47 In
this example, only the relevant words are presented in hieroglyphs:48
43 E.g. DZA 29.912.590 (d’Orbiney, 8,9), DZA 29.911.770 (pAnastasi I, 25,5).
44 E.g. DZA 29.912.620 (pChester Beatty I, 10,2) ist ir Hr sw sDr Xry wa nht “ as for Horus, he was
sleeping under a tree.”
45 For “reference tracking” in classifier languages, see Craig 1987; Croft 1994. This phenomenon
was clearly detected and described by Polis in his elaborate study on the linguistic registers of the
scribe Amennakhte son of Ipuy during the 20th Dynasty (see Polis 2012: 38).
46 See, for example, the sentence Dwt iryt r.f in sn.f StX
“Evil
done to him by his brother Seth” (Gardiner 31957: 270 = Eb. I, 13).
47 The hieroglyph shows a dead enemy with an axe in his head. For some examples showing
Canaanite axes in the head of the dead man, see Ziffer 1990: 70*.
48 Available in Gardiner 31957: 399. For a similar example see Urk. IV, 695,3. Compare this to a
similar example from the 19th Dynasty analyzed by Kammerzell forthcoming.

26

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

[1.a] “Then that enemy, whose name was
CL

[ENEMY]

tti-an
[1.b] came and collected to himself

CL

[ENEMY] CL[PLURAL]

rebels
[1.c] His majesty proceeded to slay him and his

crew CL[ENEMY] CL[PLURAL]”

Therefore, this particularly marked choice of using the “enemy” classifier, instead of
the unmarked
classifier, demonstrates the possible discourse motivation relayed
through in classifier choice. In this case, the referent being tracked through this particular discourse happens to be explicitly classified as an “enemy.”49 In the meantime,
it also creates a powerful “visual rhyming” foregrounding the topic [ENEMY].50
2.2.2 Who is talking? The case of 1st person classifiers
Egyptian classifiers may also play a role in individuation, i.e. signaling a single “contoured referent” of a respective noun or, in our case, pronoun. This discursive function
can be illustrated via the use of the 1st person pronoun. In most languages, the 1st person singular pronoun is not marked for gender or rank.51 Therefore, the 1st person pronoun refers to the “speaker” without giving any additional information to facilitate the
identification of the speaker.
As far as we know, in spoken Egyptian the 1st person was also not marked for any
characteristic of the person, such as gender or social status. The 1st person suffix-pronoun in spoken Egyptian was a vowel (probably i),52 and thus, in most cases, was not
represented in the vowel-less script, as shown in the table below. However the written
Egyptian classifier system offers individuating information through with at least six
variant forms of the 1st person pronoun:

49
50
51
52

See DZA 20.554.380 for a similar example. On this topic compare Allon 2010: 9-14.
For “visual rhyming” see Goldwasser 1995: 60-62 (especially 61).
Siewierska 2004: 104-105 & passim.
On the status of the yod i in Egyptian, see Reintges 1994: 214-215. Kammerzell (1995, 2005) and
Peust (1999) have shown that the grapheme <j> does not correspond to a glottal stop but rather to a
sonorant. Similar semantic information about the 1st person speaker appears in other pronouns as
well. For suffix pronouns, dependent pronouns, independent pronouns, and the old perfective
(stative), see Gardiner 31957: 39, 45, 53, 234.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

27

[2] Classifiers for 1st person
[MALE]
[DIVINE] prototypical god Horus
[DIVINE] prototypical anthropomorphic god
( )(i) +

[KING]
[DIGNITARY]
[FEMALE]

Therefore, the verbal construction “I have given” di.n.(i) could appear in the script
with any of the variant classifiers, as shown in (3) below:
[3.a] gender

[MALE]

[FEMALE]

[3.b] divinity

[GOD/DIVINE KING]

53

[3.c] social rank
[3.d] no classification

[KING]
(vowel i, no CL)

[GOD/DIVINE KING]

[DIGNITARY]
(no vowel, no CL)

st

In (3.d), the 1 person marker corresponds to phonetic writing only alone, through the
use of a simple vowel i, and no accompanying classifier to provide any pragmatic
information about the “speaker.” The second example lacks any phonetic representation or classifier.54
That the classifiers of the 1st person were semantically meaningful and helped
both writer and reader to track referents through discourse can be argued on the basis
of the choice of classifiers made by the famous 18th Dynasty queen, Hatshepsut. As a
woman playing the role of a (male) king, she struggled with the issue of self-representation during her entire reign. This struggle can be observed in royal sculpture, where
graded variations of female, male and “in between” representations are wellattested.55 The iconic individuation of the 1st person singular pronouns exposed the
queen (or her scribes) to a difficult decisions, since the classifiers
,
and
that would best represent the classification of an Egyptian royal personality 56 are
actually marked as [MALE] in gender. As a “spelling choice,” she seems to have
preferred to be represented in many of her inscriptions by the simple phonetic 1st
person i instead of a human 1st person classifier, thus avoiding the gender issue

53

is a representation of god in a human prototype in contrast to the very early animal prototype
, see Shalomi-Hen 2006; Goldwasser 2002: 113-144.
54 In Old Kingdom mastabas the missing classifier is to be searched in the scenes accompanying the
text.
55 E.g. Roehrig, Dreyfus & Keller 2005: 166-173.
56 The divine nature of the Egyptian kingship enabled the royals to take a [DIVINE] gender classifier
instead of a [HUMAN] gender classifier. On the
as the “royal falcon” see Shalomi-Hen 2006:
39-44.

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

28

altogether.57 Another clear cut example of discourse sensitivity is evidenced in the
speech of the cow-goddess to Hatshepsut. In a 1st person monologue, the cow-goddess
is represented by the phonetic spelling , in 1st person pronouns that occur in the
text.58

2.3 Some grammatical functions of Egyptian classifiers
Finally, Egyptian classifiers can also fulfill grammatical functions, similar to classification systems of other languages. We present here three functions we have identified
for Egyptian classifiers: at the root (§2.3.1), word (§2.3.2), and phrase (§2.3.3) levels.
2.3.1 Root marking
In Egyptian, classifiers usually mark the end of a root by directly following it and by
appearing before the grammatical information of tense and person.59 In example 4
below, the verb root ii
is immediately followed by the classifier
[MOVEMENT],
60
st
which itself is followed by the past tense marker n
. The 1 person pronoun has
no phonetic representation, but the speaker is marked as a human male through the
classifier.
[4]

“[that] (I) came” (lit. “come cl[MOVT] [past] (I) cl[MALE]”)

Therefore, this characteristic position of the
classifier, next to the verb root itself,
renders the grammatical structure of the word more transparent.61 The salience of the
root in the Egyptian system is reflected and enhanced by this phenomenon. The root
shows a strong linguistic presence, and the script keeps the root and its prototypical
classification very much alive in the reader’s mind.
2.3.2 Derivational function: Signaling agent nominalization
One of the motivations for Egyptian classifiers is to specify the prototypical agent of
actions. The presence of this agent classifier signals the grammatical process called, in

57 Compare Goldwasser 2006c: 273.
58 See Naville 1894-1898: pls. XCIV & XCVI. Sometimes the is also absent. On the choice of for
1st person representation and its possible reasons on the Metropolitan statue of Haremhab, see
Goldwasser 2011.
59 See the description of this phenomenon with other tense markers in Gardiner 31957: 325.
60 “Examples where the formative n precedes the determinative are rare, and may be considered as
faulty” (Gardiner 31957: 328). See also Allen 2000: 224.
61 This adds to another very important root-constraint of the script —– suffix pronouns are never
coupled into biconsonantals with the root. For example, the combination sDm.i
([while] I
hear) is always written with the combination of
(Faulkner 1962: 259) representing the triconsonantal root s-D-m, and a suffix pronoun. Theoretically, biconsonantals that combine the last
consonant of the root and the suffix could be an option, e.g. mi ; however, this is not exercised in
the script. This kind of sandhi is extremely rare but it is found in at least two cases: ns (< tr+ sw)
and wsy (< wy + sw) as expressive particle in adjectival predicate in Late Egyptian. We are grateful
to Jean Winand for this remark.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

29

oral language grammar, ‘agentive nominalizations,’ traditionally termed ‘participles’
in Egyptian grammar.62
Examples of agentive classifiers functioning as nominalizing gender markers,
[MALE],

[FEMALE] are given below in [5].

[5.a]

[MALE]
63

wHa

“watchman”

wrSy
[5.b]

“fowler”

[FEMALE]

mnat

“wet nurse”64

Smayt

“singer”65

The subject of interest here is that, just as in oral language agent nominalization, these
human nominalizing classifiers generally designate agents of traditional activities,
such as fowler, wet-nurse, singer, or watchman.66
2.3.3 Syntactic function: Marker of relative clauses67
In other cases of nominalization, particularly when the signified is referred to by a
whole phrase that is a relative clause, the
classifier functions as a relative clause
marker, 68 as shown in example [6] below:
[6]

“one who turns his back to him”69

2.4 When there is no classifier information
The Egyptian classifier system exhibits several instances, as do other classifier
languages, where a word, as a rule, is either not accompanied by a classifier with
semantic value, or not accompanied by a classifier at all. We have identified three
such cases of different natures: one case of “phonetic determinative,”70 and two cases
62 In European languages, the process of agentive nominalization is usually done by morphological
derivation, as in sing-er, build-er, teach-er, etc. In Egyptian, this derivation probably corresponded,
in many cases, to a vowel-change, which is not evidenced in the script.
63 Faulkner 1962: 66.
64 This word gets two classifiers: the metonymic classifier [BREAST] and the generic classifier
[FEMALE] (DZA 24.057.170).
65 Gardiner 31957: 448.
66 Gardiner 31957: 274 (ex. 6).
67 For the analysis of a classifier used as noun phrase marker, see Goldwasser 2006b: 476, compare
Grinevald 2000: 64.
68 This phenomenon is already discerned in Gardiner 31957: 271.
69 Gardiner 31957: 271.
70 Here we use the term “phonetic” without committing ourselves to more than the fact that these
classifiers stand for sounds of a word they evoke, with no link to any semantic value. The term
“phonological” might also be used, although it would not be, strictly speaking, any more appropriate since all established writing systems are neither phonetic nor phonological, but rather partly
mnemotechnic systems aimed at competent speakers of the language.

30

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

of the total absence of classifiers. Two different motivations are involved: nonreferentiality and high iconicity. The only motivation unique to the Egyptian system is
the “high iconicity” phenomenon, which stems from the special characteristic of the
Egyptian script system, and thus, does not exist in other languages or script systems.71
2.4.1 A classifier with no semantic function?
The special case of “phonetic determinatives”
There are cases where a classifier is not related to the semantic referent of the word
(semantically motivated), but instead reproduces the phonetic structure of the word72
it follows (making it “phonologically motivated”). Often this “phonetic classifier”
appears side by side with semantic classifiers.
One example of such a phonetic classifier appears in the word ibi
73

“to thirst after,” which takes three classifiers in a row: [KID]

[WATER] and [ACTIONS OF MOUTH]. The classifier of interest here is the first one,
which bears no semantic relation to the verbal root ib

,

“to thirst after,” while the

other two,
[WATER] and
[ACTIONS OF MOUTH], are semantic classifiers
referring to the [patient] and the [action/actor] of that verbal root, and stand in
meronymic/taxonomic relation to the word. In

, the first classifier

, therefore, appears to have shed its semantic value and instead acquired a
phonetic one by being analogous in sound to the verb root.74
The proposed analysis here is that the use of the “kid” classifier, as a purely phonetic classifier in the verb “to thirst after,” might be derived from an intermediate use
of the classifier as an iconic pictorial logogram or repeater

“kid.” 75 As a logo-

gram or repeater classifier, the hieroglyph
could have become associated with
the pronunciation of the word ib “kid” and thereby come to mark the sound value of
ib
, probably also contributing some additional information on the vowels of the
word.
As presented in the Appendix below, this phenomenon of a “phonologically
motivated classifier”76 has been accounted for in oral classification systems, although
it is considered rare typologically. It has been identified, for instance, in some
languages of the Pacific and South America.

71
72
73
74

On the high level of iconicity within the Egyptian script, see Goldwasser 1995 & 2009: 336-354.
Or part of the word.
DZA 20.553.790. For a semiotic discussion of this word, see Goldwasser 1995: 45-46 & 71-77.
Compare this to a similar explanation by Kammerzell forthcoming: n. 6. Another application of the
same
phonetic classifier is found in the word ibhty
“a kind of stone”, see
Faulkner 1962: 16.
75 In the New Kingdom example
“kid”,75 the repeater classifier
[KID] is followed by a
taxonomic one, in this case the classifier [HIDE & TAIL], which further places the animal into a
generic category of “having hide and tail,” see Goldwasser 2002: 57-89.
76 Grinevald, see Appendix below.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

31

2.4.2 No classifiers for words with no referential meaning
In classifier languages, grammatical words such as (a) prepositions, and (b) primary
(non-derived) adjectives, usually do not get classified; this is also true of Egyptian.
a. Prepositions
Prepositions as a whole — spatial Hr

‘on,’ Xr

‘below,’77 temporal xft

‘after,’ or others such as Hna
‘with,’ mi
‘like’ — do not appear with
classifiers. Well-known in general linguistics is the fact that adpositions in general
(prepositions as well as postpositions) are function words of a relational nature that do
not refer to events or entities in the world, and therefore are not expected to take
classifiers.
There is, however, an interesting exception to this rule that actually proves the rule. It
is the case of the agentive preposition in “by,” which can be written either without a
classifier, as in
(written phonetically, i+n), or with a classifier
, a not
uncommon variation. As noted by Gardiner, 78 this agentive ‘by-phrase’ with an
expressed classifier is used mainly with the various passive forms. In these cases, the
mere presence of the human classifier underlines the agentive nature of the Egyptian
passive construction.79 Moreover, it is interesting to note how the classifier in this
case specifically depicts an agent “on the move,” thus underlying the full agentivity
of this argument. The fact that the classifier appears in the middle of the word, and
not at the end, is otherwise due to aesthetic reasons.80
b. Adjectival words
Words that come immediately to the mind of every Egyptologist in the context of
“classifier absence” or “non-classification” are roots with adjectival meaning, which
perform either a modifier or predicative function. For example, the primary quantifying adjective nb

“all, every” never takes a classifier.81 This is also the case

with adjective-like verbs, such as nfr “good, beautiful,” which can express any
number of positive qualities, such as “beautiful, fair, good, kind, happy, well,
necessary, etc.”82 Other examples include
wr “big” and
nDs/Sri “small.”83
As recent studies in general linguistics have shown, adjective-like words, which express qualities of entities and are not in themselves referential, do not constitute as
77 The preposition includes iconic information of “being above” as the head is on top of the human
body. The hieroglyph Xr, “butcher block” contains the information of “being under” in the same
way.
78 Gardiner 31957: 128-129.
79 This is said in contrast to the common motivation for passives in European languages, for instance,
with no expressed agent, whether by choice of the speaker or because it is not known.
80 The variation
would be iconically unacceptable. For different examples from Old Kingdom
tombs, see DZA 20.805.290, 20.805.300. A variation without the n
is also known, see DZA
20.805.340. The combination of the first letter and the rare classifier, as well as the unambiguous
grammatical and contextual situation, creates a “unique” classifier effect that may lead to a
spelling without the n, which may be felt as redundant information.
81 For nb as the only primary adjective in Egyptian, see Allen 2000: 61.
82 This polysemic root, when acquiring the meaning “to beautify,” tends to take the
[DEFAULT]
classifier (Kammerzell forthcoming: 7, and Appendix below n. 136). Other derivations of the word
may also acquire classifiers.
83 Winand sees the Egyptian adjective as participle, Winand 2006: 156. On adjectives, see Peust
2008: 58-82.

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

32

clearly defined a lexical category in many oral languages of the world as they do in
European languages.84 This characteristic of adjective-like words seems, therefore, to
be echoed in Egyptian writing by the absence of classifiers85.

2.4.3 No classifiers when there is high iconic motivation
Another instance of the lack of classifier information is the absence of a classifier
after a noun or verbal root. Upon inspection, in many cases this absence appears connected to the use of a logogram or an ideogram. It appears that the high iconicity of
some logographic or ideographic representations could motivate the consistent
absence of a classifier. Such a case, for instance, is that of the scarab ideogram xpr ,
which stands for the root “to become, to reincarnate.86” This ideogram was very informative pictorially (and thus semantically) to the native Egyptian speaker, thus, the
addition of classifiers was unnecessary.87 Another instance of a word written with a
highly informative logogram that makes classifiers redundant is the verb sDm
“to hear,” written metonymically by the logogram of the ear

, and a phonogram m

.
Thus far we have shown how the Egyptian classifier system shares many similarities with other classifier systems known around the world. Now we will explore the
fact that it also has interesting characteristics of its own.
88

3 Exploring the “grammar” of Egyptian classifiers
This section explores the particular grammar of the Egyptian classifier system, which
is overall more complex than that of known oral classifier systems. Accounted for are
two types of situations: first, the fact that certain words take several classifiers, raising
the question of the grammar of such arrangements; and second, the fact that in certain
instances on certain occasions words merge with their classifier. We argue that, while
these specificities of Egyptian classifiers set this system apart from other known
classifier systems of the world, Egyptian classifiers are reminiscent of various
linguistic processes well-known in other languages. The multi-classifier phenomenon
will be compared to the linguistic devices of nominal compounding and verbal
incorporation; furthermore, the results of classifier and word merging in some cases
84 See Dixon & Alexandra 2006.
85 The category of “adjective” in Egyptian is almost limited to Earlier Egyptian. From Late Egyptian
onwards, this category dramatically diminishes to become virtually absent in Coptic (we are grateful to Jean Winand for this remark). For a general discussion of the term ‘adjective’, see
Haspelmath 2010.
86 Pascal Vernus elaborately discusses the complex semiotic status of the scarab hieroglyph, see
Vernus 2003: 205-213.
87 On the semiotics of the grapheme xpr, see Goldwasser 1995: 48-49. The Egyptians regarded the
beetles emerging from the dung-ball created by the Scarabaeus sacer as an autonomous birth, and
thus the verb xpr became a vivid metaphor for “coming into existence [like a scarab],” i.e. eternal
renewal. The scarab is also a manifestation of the daily renewal of the sun-god.
88 For writings with the ideogram without the m see e.g. Urk. IV. A more complicate case is the
semiotics of the hieroglyph that stands for the verb iri “to do” and never takes a classifier. This
case is dealt with in a forthcoming publication.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

33

will be linked to the lexicalization processes of such compounds. A third phenomenon, that of “classifier loss,” will be compared to the process of grammaticalization
in general linguistics.89

3.1 Nominal compounding and verbal incorporation
As demonstrated above, words in the Egyptian script may take a combination of
classifiers. While these “multiple-classifier” constructions set the Egyptian classifier
system apart from other better known classifier systems from around the world,90 we
argue here that this “multiple-classifier” characteristic provides a strong argument for
considering this classifier system as a linguistic part of written Egyptian. Our argument consists of showing how the specific linear arrangement of classifiers is reminiscent of grammatical processes known in general linguistics as “nominal compounding” and “verbal incorporation.”
3.1.1 Order constraints: Meronymic precedes taxonomic classifiers
The first observation on the sequence of classifiers in Egyptian is that it follows a
strict “meronymic-taxonomic” categorization order, in both nouns and verbs. Consider how, in the noun examples below, the meronymic classifiers (hair and throwstick) precede the generic, superordinate taxonomic classifications [FEMALE] and
[MALE]:
[7] nouns:
‘widow’

xArt
NOUN

widow

CL

CL

‘Asiatic’

CL

CL

[FEMALE]

aAm

[meronymic] [taxonomic]

NOUN

[meronymic]

[taxonomic]

Asiatic

foreign weapon

man

[HAIR]
hair

woman

[THROW-STICK]

[MALE]

The same order of classifiers is found in verb classification, as shown below, in which
the meronymic classifiers for [patient] or [instrument] arguments almost always precede the taxonomic classifiers of the [event] itself.91
In the examples 8 below, both of these verbs take two classifiers: “drinking”92
takes a classifier representing the prototypical [patient] of the act of drinking, water,
89 For a basic reference to lexical sources of some major grammatical elements in languages of the
world, see Heine & Kuteva 2002.
90 While in a spoken language, an accumulation of classifiers may create a communication disturbance because of the increase of phonetic elements after the word, in the Egyptian system, the
graphemic classifiers are “mute,” and thus, do not have this effect. Nevertheless, the process of
multiple classification marking is known, for instance, in certain Amazonian languages with somewhat similar systems of noun classification known as “noun class systems” rather than strictly
“classifier” systems.
91 This order becomes very conspicuous if we check the detailed list of verb classifiers used in
Wenamun, as presented in Kammerzell forthcoming: 27.
92 For the discussion of this verb in the Old Kingdom, see Kammerzell forthcoming: 5. Our spelling
of swri is typical for the Middle Kingdom and later hieratic manuscripts, see DZA 28.584.230.

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

34

while “sculpting” takes a classifier for its prototypical [instrument], a knife. Therefore, in both of these verbs, the meronymic patient or instrument classifier precedes
the action classifier specific to the verb.
[8] verbs:
‘to drink’

swri
VERB

to drink

CL

CL

[WATER]

‘to carve’

[ACTIONS OF MOUTH]

[meronymic]

[taxonomic]

patient

actor/action

water

action of mouth

xti
VERB

to carve

CL

[KNIFE]

CL

[ACTION OF FORCE]

[meronymic]

[taxonomic]

instrument

actor/action

knife

action of force

Another illuminating example of the multiple-classifier construction following this
strict meronymic-taxonomic order is found with the verb wHa “to fowl,” which takes
both bird and fish as its two prototypical patients of the fowling act, followed by an
action classifier. The expression of the whole verbal event is given below [9]:
[9]

‘to fowl’

wHa
VERB

to fowl

CL

[BIRD] 93
[FISH]

CL

CL

[ACTION OF FORCE]

[meronymic]

[taxonomic]

patients

actor/action

bird-fish

action of force

Therefore, this example
clearly illustrates the constraint placed on classifier order, where the classifiers for patients always precede classifiers for actions.94
Notice how, in this case, the instrument of fowling is actually present but not
individualized or isolated. It is, however, iconically implied in the last hieroglyph
which represents pictorially in a single ideogram the active agent performing his
prototypical ‘action’ while holding the prototypical tool, a stick
of this word, such as the deverbal nominalized “fowler”

. In other variations
95

(with the

93 Even though this sign represents a duck iconically, the duck is the prototypical bird in the Egyptian
landscape; thus, as a classifier, it stands for birds in general. A similar phenomenon can be traced
on the lexical level, where the word for “duck” Apd comes to refer to “bird,” see Goldwasser 1999
& 2002: 19-24.
94 The possible reasons for this order of classifiers are not discussed in this publication. The topic is
studied extensively in Lincke 2011.
95 DZA 22.568.100. For the history of the spelling of this word, see DZA 22.568.090-200, especially
in Late Egyptian, DZA 22.568.110. Typically, not all examples of the word show full classifycation; some examples omit one or both of the patients (fish or bird), while others omit the actor

What are “Determinatives” good for?

35

agentive nominalizing classifier
discussed above in §3.3.2), the prototypical
instrument is represented by a metonymic performing hand with the stick
.
3.1.2 Classifier order of event schema vs. sentence order of spoken Egyptian
An interesting feature of the order of the different classifiers in the verb schema is that
it happens to be the reverse of the basic syntactic order of Egyptian. While the general
sentence order in written Egyptian is always Verb-Object (VO), whether in the Verb
Subject Object order (VSO) or in the Subject Verb Object order (SVO), the classifier
sequence within the orthography of the verb is always the reverse: [patient]-[action]
(corresponding to OV).
This difference between Verb-Object order at the sentence level and patient
(object) – action (verb) at the classifier level is exemplified in the predicate construction in example 10, a spell of drinking medication. Note how, at the syntactic level,
the direct object of the verb of drinking (= medication) follows the verb complex (root
plus verb classifiers), while the classifier order within the orthography of the verb is
the reverse, with the prototypical patient classifier [WATER] preceding the action
classifier [ACTIONS OF MOUTH].
[10]

swri
VERB

to drink

‘drinking medication’

CL

[WATER]

CL

[ACTIONS OF MOUTH]

[meronymic]

[taxonomic]

patient

actor/action

water

action of mouth

VERB (ACTION)

CL

pXrt

[POWDER]

CL

[PLURAL]

[taxonomic]

NOUN

[plural]

medication

powder-plural

OBJECT (PATIENT)

The same manner of contrasting word order at the sentence level versus at the verb
classifier level can also be illustrated through the structure of the whole sentence 11
“your fowler is bringing fish,” see below. Within the classifier structure of the
deverbal noun “fowler,” the [patient] classifiers, [BIRD] and [FISH], precede the
[ACTION OF FORCE] classifier (OV order), while at the syntactic level of the sentence,
the syntactic object/patient (fish) follows the verb (SVO order).

classifier or the gender-nominalizer marker. Another semantically related word “to catch fish”
HAm, may take similar classifiers (Faulkner 1962: 163). However, this word employs a different,
metaphorical, prototype of a non-human agent,
a bird-“fish catcher.”

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

36

[11] ‘your fowler is bringing fish’96

fowler97

Your

on98

(to) bring

fish

[FISH]

CL

pAy.k
POSS.ART.2SG.M

wHa

[BIRD] CL[FISH] CL[ACTION OF FORCE] Hr

CL

NOUN

[meronymic]

[taxonomic]

(DEVERBAL)

PATIENTS

ACTOR/ACTION

SUBJECT (ACTOR)

PREP

ms.t

[MOVT]

CL

VERB

rmw
NOUN

[PLURAL]

CL

[taxonomic]
[plural]

VERB (ACTION)

OBJECT (PATIENT)

3.1.3 A linguistic comparison:
The processes of “nominal compounding” and “verbal incorporation”
In the linguistic process of nominal compounding, a noun functions as the head of the
compound, while another element, in a dependent relationship to the head noun,
indicates a property of this noun. This process of nominal compounding commonly
appears in English, for example in the compound nouns “rain boots,” “hair pin,” or
“leather shoes,” and “plastic cup,” in which the first element, a dependent noun,
stands in any of a number of possible semantic relations to the second element, the
head noun. These semantic relationships can be rendered explicit by undoing the compounding, thus revealing either a goal relation in “boots for rain” and “pin to hold
hair,” or articulating a source (material) as in “shoes made of leather” and “cup made
of plastic.” Let us consider some examples mentioned above (§4.1.1.[7]; §3.3.2[5a]),
“widow”-“hair-woman,”

, “wet-nurse”-“breast-woman”

, or “Asiatic”-“boomerang-man”
as pictorial parallels of this
nominal compounding process.
In verbal incorporation, the other linguistic process to be considered, one can also
observe the combination of a head element and a dependent element, set in a particular order and having specific features. In this instance, the head element is a transitive
verb and its dependent a patient noun. The phenomenon exists in English, although it
is restricted to certain constructions, such as agent nominalization and participial
constructions. Examples of agent nominalization in [12] below show how, in the
process of verbal incorporation in English, the dependent (incorporated) patient precedes the verb, in contrast to the position of an object [patient] argument that follows
the verb, in a full sentence:

96 DZA 22.568.340. New Kingdom (Dynasty 19) hieratic text. Original version in the papyrus:
. Because of the complexity of this example, we have added a
line of literal translation underneath the hieroglyphs.
97 In this example there is no classifier (nominalizer) for the actual actor.
98 This preposition carries the meaning of progressive action.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

[12] transitive clause
a. they climbed this mountain
b. they smoked a Cuban cigar
c. they drive my truck’

vs

37

verbal incorporation
a’. (they are) mountain climbers
b’. (they are) cigar smokers
c’. (they are) truck drivers

As noted already in the case of Egyptian meronymic classifiers, the semantic relation
between dependent and head in these incorporated constructions can be varied. Consider the various semantic relations in the following English participial constructions,
patient in (a), instrument in (b), and location in (c):
[13] a. watching birds
a’. bird watching
b. fishing with a fly
b’. fly fishing
c. kayaking on a river c’. river kayaking

The two parallelisms between the linguistic processes of nominal compounding and
verbal incorporation, in both English and Egyptian, are therefore, (1) a similar
constraint on reversed word order, and (2) non-restricted semantic relations. However,
another important parallelism exists: the fact that the dependent element must be nonreferential and non-specific. In many languages, these types of constructions are used
to designate traditional activities, for example the term “reindeer slaughter” in Koryak
(Siberia).99
Mithun, in her substantial article on this type of incorporation process, suggests
that the incorporation occurs because some entity, quality, or activity is recognized
sufficiently frequently to be considered name-worthy in its own right.100
In Egyptian, the meronymic classifier appearing to the left of the taxonomic one
always stands for such an encyclopedic argument, whether in terms of patient, instrument, or location.
That the patient classifier in verbal incorporation is non-referential is very clear in
Egyptian sentences, such as the one cited above in [11], in which the co-textual,
referential information informs us that this certain fowler specifically caught fish.
Nevertheless, the patient classifiers in the verb form still include the [BIRD]
classifier as a prototypical encyclopedic (non-referential) patient of the fowling
action.
As this process of incorporation is attested in many languages around the world,
not surprising is its occurrence in Egyptian, even if it is within the graphemic classifier system in this case.
The patient incorporation in Egyptian classifier constructions persists in the
presence of the referential patient objects of the verbs being classified, as if the classifier complex served to reveal the hidden complexity of the verb’s meaning. Thus, the
Egyptian reader gains a forceful “double-level” of information — at a cultural/encyclopedic level via the classifier system, and at a discourse-referential level through the
sentence construction.

99 Mithun 1984: 856 (non-specific) & 847 (Koryak). Koryak are a Siberian people called “rich in
reindeer” who came to the Bering Strait region after the Eskimo people.
100 Mithun 1984: 848.

38

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

3.2 Lexicalization in language and pictorial lexicalization in the script
Lexicalization in language occurs when compounded or incorporated elements lose
their independence, and form new entities in which the original components may still
be identified, but where the entirety must be semantically interpreted as referring to a
new conceptual unit. 101
In the case of the Egyptian script, one finds a parallel evolution from compounding to complete lexicalization. In the incorporation process illustrated above
with the example of the verbs “to drink” and “to fowl,” the classifiers have clearly
remained independent units (§3.1.2). Even if the classifier order is constrained, the
classifiers themselves are still free components.102 However, one finds cases where a
verb is written with two hieroglyphs that have become pictorially fused — comprising
a combination of two lexical103 components that have become inseparable. We use the
expression ‘pictorial lexicalization’ to refer to this phenomenon. The pictorially
fused hieroglyphs are prototypical and no longer sensitive to contextual or pragmatic
considerations.
For example, cases of pictorial lexicalization104 in the script are

rdi (imi) “to

give” (literally “bread-giving”) and
ini “to bring” (literally “pot-bringing”). These
two ideograms can be analyzed as a combination of two elements, the first being the
non-referential patients — “bread” and “pot” — the second the action itself, which is
represented by the metonymic prototypical body part of the human agent involved —
“giving” by the hand and “bringing” by the legs.
Even if the context of the sentence involves the giving of slaves, the word rdi
would still be written as “loaf-giving.”105 Likewise, the object “pot” is fixed to
the verb “to bring,” independent of the context in which the verb is used.106

101 Mithun 1984: 889-890.
102 These variations are subject to diachronic or regional developments, as well as to idiosyncratic
scribal choices.
103 This is to be differentiated from combinations of a lexical (iconic) sign and a sign carrying phonological information, in cases such as
, , and
. The combination sign
does not carry the
meaning “walking pool,” nor is the pool the patient of the verb. This combined hieroglyph is a
logogram for the verb Sm “to go.” The pool icon plays the role of signifier for the phonetic signified S.
104 I am grateful to my former student Omer Shafran for calling my attention to this phenomenon a
long time ago (O.G.).
105 See already the sophisticated discussion of Henri Fischer in his article “The Evolution of Composite Hieroglyphs” about the variegated semiotic status of what he calls “Composite Signs,”
where he also suggests that the different parts of this hieroglyph
are put together in a
“meaningful way(…) a hand presents the bilateral sign di (itself a loaf) of the verb ‘give’.”
106 E.g.
“A southern live panther brought to her majesty from the
foreign lands…” written above a picture of a panther-Hatshepsut, 18th Dynasty, see Naville 18941898: 80.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

39

Although both ideograms107 “to give” and “to bring” are pictorially lexicalized
units presenting a chosen prototypical patient object (bread loaf and pot), some minor
variations of the patient may occur. For instance, the verb “to give” is also attested
with a rounded bread loaf
, or in rare cases even with a nw pot
.108 As for
the verb “to bring”, an interesting variant is found in Ptolemaic Egyptian, a period of
the language during which the revival of old signs and the creation of new ones is in
vogue. This Ptolemaic variant demonstrates the concept of the reconstruction of the
whole from the part by depicting the classifier as a whole human body instead of
merely the legs
.109

3.3 Grammaticalization as a cause for the loss of classifiers110
The third process found in the Egyptian classifier system, which is reminiscent of a
linguistic process known in oral languages, is a standard case of grammaticalization
— taken here as the process of evolution of lexical items, or content words, into
grammatical elements or function words.
The Egyptian script provides an interesting case of such grammaticalization,
where verbs retain their classifiers when used as content words but lose them once the
verbs have turned into auxiliaries. Thus, the absence of classifiers signals the verb’s
new grammatical status. Two such examples are presented here: the verbs ‘to say’
and ‘to stand.’
3.3.1 When the verb ‘to say’ becomes a quotative
‘Quotatives’ are grammatical elements that introduce direct reported speech and
thought. In oral languages, quotatives have often been observed as grammaticalized
forms of the verb “to say.”111

107 We use the term logogram when a sign refers directly to a word in the lexicon through its pictorial
meaning, which in turn refers to a referent in the world — such as
“dog.” Indeed, due to its
iconic nature, in many cases logograms offer additional pictorial information with regards to the
cultural prototype, see, for example, my long discussion “No Ugly Dogs, Please”, in Goldwasser
2002: 91-110. We call hieroglyphs such as
meaning “front” or
which means “strength”
ideograms. In such cases (which are not very common in the Egyptian system) the script does not
refer to any referent in the real world, such as “the front part of a lion” or “the head of a panther.”
In order to reach the correct meaning, the reader must pass through additional cultural-metaphoric
levels. These types of complex semiotic deliberations are discussed in Goldwasser 1995: 54-79.
108 Gardiner 31957: 454, D37, D38, D39. It seems that the markedness of the patient in the verb “to
give” called for the early spelling variation (Gardiner 31957: 533, X8), where the loaf alone
metonymically represents the verb rdi “to give,” which has three semantic arguments — agent,
patient, and receiver (for this terminology see Van Valin 2001: 22-33). In the opposite spectrum of
attested variation, is where the patient is neglected, while the agent of “giving” is represented by
the extended hand alone, see
, Gardiner 31957: 454, D36. This last variation is more common
in hieratic.
109 See Goldwasser 1995: 21-22.
110 This topic was first raised by Iddo Diamant (Hebrew University of Jerusalem) in an unpublished
lecture (On the Interrelationship of Classification and Grammaticalization, Berlin, January 2010)
given in the framework of the COST.
111 See Heine and Kuteva 2002: 265-269.

40

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

In Egyptian, the most common verb Dd
“to say” does not take a classifier in
most cases. Our proposal is that this absence of classifiers is due to the fact that Dd
has become grammaticalized as a quotative. From the Middle Kingdom onwards,
Dd
is very rarely used in contexts where it still carries the full semantic meaning
of “to say” and exists as an essential part of the described chain of events. In these
rare cases, where Dd still carries its full semantic load, the verb may take the classifier
[ACTIONS OF MOUTH], i.e.
.112
On the other hand, verbs with similar meanings that keep their full lexical semantics, such as mdw
“to speak”, also keep their classifier
in most
cases.
3.3.2 When posture verbs are used as auxiliaries
Another case of the grammaticalization of verbs is when posture verbs, such as ‘to
stand,’ ‘to sit,’ and ‘to lie,’ become copulas or auxiliaries, and consequently, lose their
fundamental semantic value.113 Posture verbs are known sources of verbal morphology in many languages of the world. This is the case for copular verbs of basic
locative constructions in languages where something or someone cannot simply ‘be’
somewhere, they are obligatorily said to ‘stand’ or ‘sit’ or ‘lie’ somewhere.114 Posture
verbs are also known sources of tense or aspect markers, such as for instance ‘to
stand’ being used to indicate the present tense, and ‘to sit’ or ‘to lie’ to indicate the
progressive. 115
The following examples illustrate the contrast between posture verbs used as main
verbs — with full semantic value and use of classifiers — and those used as auxiliaries — hence without classifiers. Example [14] below is taken from a New Kingdom
version of an old wisdom text that describes the disadvantages of old age. In this case,
the posture verbs have clearly retained their full semantic value, thus, are accompanied by their respective classifiers.

112 In Coptic, the word ƢĮ is a clear quotative. In Late Egyptian, different variations of the verb already show clear grammaticalized forms, see ýerný & Groll 31984: 164-166. This topic should be
reseved for a large scale study according to periods, scripts, genres and idiolects. An example of a
minimal context in a narrow synchronic framwork can be found in a single battle scene on a wall
in Karnak dated to Seti I. All occurences, but one, of the verb Dd in this battle-scene are quotatives
or quotes on various levels of grammaticalization. All occurences appears as expected without a
classifier. In a single phrase Dd still carries its full sematic meaning: whi nb hr tp Dbawt.f Hr Dd
pHty.f m xAswt wAw “Every run-away from his fingers tells his power to far-away foreign lands.” In
this single case the verb is written with the classifier –
, see The Battle Reliefs of King Seti I,
pl. 3, l. 11.
113 Winand 2006: 329-332.
114 The Spanish verb ‘estar’ which, as a general verb of location (as in ‘el nino esta en su cama’ meaning ‘the child is in his bed’) is in fact a grammaticalized verb of posture meaning ‘to stand’. This
verb of posture has also become grammaticalized in that language as the auxiliary of the progressive aspect (as in ‘esta cantando’ meaning ‘(he) is singing’).
115 Many cases of the grammaticalization of posture verbs are discussed in Newman 2002.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

[14]

41

‘to stand’

aHa

[painful (is) standing (and) sitting!]116

CL

qsn

[NEGATIVE]

ADJ.VERB

painful

CL

aHa

[MOVEMENT]

VERB

negative

standing

VERB

Hmst

CL

[SIT]

VERB

movement

sitting

sit

SUBJECT

However, from the Middle Kingdom onwards, the verb aHa
‘to stand’ began to
be employed as an auxiliary in narrative chains to link sequential events. When this
verb appears in the auxiliary role its
[MOVEMENT] classifier tends to be lost117 as
illustrated in [15] below:
[15] ‘then he gave,’ from lit. “(he) stood up and he gave”

aHa

n

rdi

to stand (past)
VERB

(past tense marker)

VERB

n

f

to give (past)

he

(past tense marker)

SUBJECT

The grammaticalization of the verb is also signaled by the absence of a personal pronoun (subject).

3.4 The “gains” of the classifiers system
As we have seen, classifiers provide the reader with a wide range of encyclopedic and
pragmatic information, while serving as grammatical “reading aids” by marking roots
from other elements, as well as by pointing to the ends of words or clauses. On certain
occasions, they may help the reader track specific referents, sometimes signaling the
status of a particular referent in a certain place or time.
In verbs and participles, the classifiers orchestrate patients, actors, and instruments
— visually bringing to life the “Theater of the Verb” and its array of arguments.
Conversely, unclassified words signal to the reader a weak level of referentiality,
or hint at processes of semantic depletion, such as grammaticalization.
The “grammar of classifiers,” once unveiled, shows that the written Egyptian sentence contains two main levels of information: a syntactic level, and an additional
116 Žába 1956 : l. 23.
117 This phenomenon was already discerned by Gardiner. A charming example is cited in Winand
(2006: 331, ex. 588):
aHa.n pA-smn aHa Hr gAgA “(…) and
then the duck stood up cackling” (pWestcar VIII, 23). For a similar process with the negative verb
tm, see Gardiner 31957: 391-2.

42

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

visual, word-based, level. The syntactic level offers the reader the expected referential
information at the level of discourse, while on the visual word level, classifier information gives priority to general conceptual information about types of entities or
events and prototypical and non-referential dependent elements of nouns or verbs, in
various semantic relations such as patient, instrument, location, or other. We have
argued that, at this level of the word, the combination of classifiers “imitates,” in the
pictorial, well-known linguistic devices, such as nominal compounding and verbal
incorporation.
We argue therefore, that the Egyptian reader was presented with a generous
amount of information at two levels. At the syntactic level, the information is referential and specific (for instance, that a particular fowler fowled a particular fish at
some determined time and space) but additionally, at the word level, encyclopedic and
culture-specific information is packaged within the spelling of the verb and signaled
by a marked order that is the reverse of the sentence structure word order.
Thus, the Egyptian written sentence, to be taken as a whole with its classifier
system, functions as a rich source of different types of information that are instantiated through different media. The phonological and syntactic systems are coded in
ways also used in all oral languages, but, in addition, the Egyptian writing system has
a language-specific, strictly visual, classifier system. Both systems convey different
types of information, in a different order, that complete and compete with each other.
This complex and rich orchestration of information has become a precious cognitive and social resource in Egyptian culture. This encoded information may hold the
clue for the reason of the endurance and success of the classifier system, and thus, its
survival in the Egyptian language for almost 3000 years.

4 What the study of “determinatives”
brings to the general study of classifiers?
It is worth reiterating the fact that there is a whole field of studies focused on classification systems in oral and signed languages, from linguistic, anthropological, and
cognitive points of view. Over the last thirty years numerous descriptions of systems
from all major continents have appeared, and one of the surprises in studying Egyptian determinatives from the angle of their being a classifier system, is how much they
do behave similarly to the classifiers of many oral languages. 118 We share this
position with Frank Kammerzell, who writes in his recent contribution “(…) I daresay
that there is no way to avoid the use of the term ‘classifier’ lest one should wish to
isolate Egyptological studies from other, theoretically more advanced disciplines.”119
However, also worth noting is that the study of the Egyptian classifier system, in
turn, can potentially provide important contributions to a more comprehensive understanding of the phenomenon of classifiers within general linguistic studies. The study
118 The original connection between the two coauthors of this article stems from this parallelism —
Egyptian classifiers studied by Goldwasser strikingly resemble the noun classifiers of Jakaltek
Popti’, a Mayan language of Central America, studied by Grinevald (see Craig and Grinevald
publications cited).
119 Kammerzell forthcoming.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

43

of Egyptian classifiers is, in fact, bound to contribute new information to update the
current proposals for establishing a typology of such systems.

4.1 Unique characteristics of the Egyptian classifier system
Egyptian “determinatives” are interesting for several reasons. First, they represent a
system that incorporates classifiers that are concomitantly applicable to several
categories of words, in particular to both nouns and verbs, while documented classifier systems of oral languages apply either to nouns or to verbs. Secondly, the Egyptian system is much more complex than other known classifier systems in that it commonly employs multiple classifier constructions that correspond to the syntactic compounding or verb incorporation processes of oral language syntax. Finally, the
Egyptian written record offers the very rare possibility of following the evolution of
the system over a very long spell of time.
4.1.1 A new type of system:
Classifiers for both nouns and verbs, but also for adverbs etc., all at once
While most known oral language classifier systems classify either nouns or verbs, the
most common being systems classifying only nouns, the Egyptian system is striking
for its ability to classify concomitantly nouns and verbs, and even certain adverbs.
Of special interest is the
[MOVEMENT (EVENT)]120 classifier, which is attested
as early as the very beginning of the 1st Dynasty, and clearly refers to an event
(“moving”) rather than to an entity of the world.121 Its existence shows that, from the
earliest stages of the Egyptian language, classifiers have applied to both nouns and
verb events. This phenomenon is one of the most original and distinctive features of
the Egyptian system. The reason for this phenomenon may lie in the fact that the
borders between “verb” and “noun” may have been rather ambiguous in early Egyptian.122
Furthermore, in addition to nouns and verbs, the system may even classify other
elements, such as prepositions (discussed above) and, in an even rarer phenomenon
typologically, adverbs (e.g. dy “here” classified by the
[PATH] classifier).
4.1.2 New constructions:
Multiple-classifier constructions and the “grammar of classifiers”
The other particularity in the Egyptian classifier system of great interest is the relatively common way sets of two or three classifiers are formed in well-determined
arrangements, following strict rules of organization, as argued above.
Egyptian classifiers provide an interesting inside look at certain cognitive
processes, through the nature of their own grammar. As we have demonstrated, Egyptian classifiers have a grammar of their own that is independent from the grammar of
spoken Egyptian, while it is reminiscent of the grammar of oral languages from many
parts of the world.
120 Goldwasser 2006b. Wierzbicka (1996: 83) sees in [MOVE] a “Semantic Primitive.”
121 Goldwasser 2006b: 478-479, King Aha.
122 Goldwasser 2006b: 473.

44

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

These phenomena are accounted for in the common linguistic processes of oral
languages although they are not known to be part of the classifier systems in those
languages.
4.1.3 La longue durée — 3,000 years of a classification system
Classifier systems that most resembles the Egyptian system are noun or verb classifier
systems, not the better known numeral classifier systems used in Asia. Both noun and
verb classifier systems have been identified in languages from America and Australia
in recent decades, as the field of classifier studies has developed. Considering that
working on indigenous languages of America and Australia today means working on
languages that are purely oral in tradition, researchers have to “meet” the language in
a synchronic state, by and large without having access to historical evidence (which
either does not exist or is not identified), or even information on sister languages that
would permit comparative reconstruction.123 Therefore, actual data for elaborating an
overall view of the lifespan of the system — birth, development and decay — is
limited. The Egyptian system, on the other hand, can provide us with an extremely
rare overview of a classifier system in use for almost three thousand years, spanning
all phases of its evolution, from its birth, through its development, to its demise and
final death.
Classifiers can be found in all script variations of hieroglyphs — pictorial hieroglyphs, cursive hieroglyphs, lapidary hieratic and hieratic scripts. We witness their
birth in the 1st Dynasty, and their continuation in Demotic and in Ptolemaic. The first
clearly attested examples of “determinatives” to emerge are mostly gender markers
[MALE] and
[FEMALE] with a few instances of
[DOG] and
[SOLDIER].124 Indeed, human classifiers are the most common classifiers in oral classifier systems,125 and their emergence as the first classifiers on the script stage so early
is unsurprising.
Egyptian classifiers constituted a highly productive, growing system. One of the
signs of this productivity is the fact that new lexemes were semantically analyzed and
provided with adequate classifiers as they entered the written lexicon, for instance the
horse. Through its lifespan, the system exhibited many new structural developments,
such as a strong tendency to create fixed combinations of classifiers, as well as a
marked development of “default” classifiers that were depleted of semantic value.126
These developments, therefore, shed new light on the processes of growth and decay
of such systems, including classifier systems of oral languages that lack ancient evidence.

123 Although see Craig (1990: 253-268), for the demonstration, on the basis of Mayan comparative
data, noun classifiers in Jakeltek Popti’ are characteristic of only the Q’anjob’alan branch of the
family, and an innovation of that branch, and therefore, must have appeared only several hundred
years before colonization.
124 See Petrie 1902: pl. XXXI-XXXII. A soldier classifier (Petrie 1902: pl. XXXII, 29). A few dwarfs
can be identified on tablets, e.g. Petrie 1902: pl. XV, 16,17. See also Regulski 2010: 87, 94.
125 Aikhenvald 2003: 402.
126 Allon 2010.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

45

Final remark
Finally, we would like to remind our patient reader, that this study is no more than a
brief overview of the questions raised. Every section of this article could be developped into a book of its own. We trust that further studies will lead to insights into
the collective mind of the ancient Egyptian civilization, as well as shed new light on
universal cognitive phenomena and their reflection in linguistic phenomena.

46

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

Appendix: Basics on Classifier Systems – by Colette Grinevald
1

Classifiers as morphosyntactic systems with a semantic profile

Classifiers constitute overt systems of categorization of clear lexical origin used in
specific morphosyntactic constructions. The first systems to be studied were classification systems of nouns,127 but more recent studies have also revealed the existence of
verb classification systems. 128 It is worth noting that no classifier system of oral
languages is attested to be classifying at once both nouns and verbs, as the Egyptian
system does.
Classification systems of nouns consist of various types, of which “classifier”
systems per se are simply one major type. European languages have no “classifier”
systems per se, but various types of such classification systems: some operate within
the lexicon (such as berry in blueberry, blackberry, boysenberry, etc.), while others
are the familiar morphosyntactic genders systems (with two or three genders:
M,F,(N)). There are also other types of noun classification systems, such as the ‘noun
class systems’ of African Bantu languages, which usually involve more classes, but
similar extensive agreement patterns. More recently, other noun class systems have
also been identified in Amazonian languages.129
1.1

Different types of nominal classifier systems
based on morphosyntactic principles

Nominal Classifier systems function via the application of an extra word or
morpheme — a classifier — which is linked to a noun and appears crucially only
once, this being the feature that most distinguishes this system from gender or noun
class systems (involved in extensive patterns of agreement). The location of the classifier determines the different sub-types of classifier systems: for instance “numeral
classifiers” appear only with numerals, while “noun classifiers” are directly attached
onto nouns.
1.2

Semantic profiles of the classifier systems of nouns

As argued by Grinevald,130 the different subtypes of noun classifier system have particular semantic profiles, along different semantic parameters, as illustrated below:
a. numeral classifiers = physical categories
two-[ROUND] oranges; three-[LONG RIGID] pencils
b. genitive classifiers = functional categories
his-[DRINKABLE] potion; their-[TRANSPORT] canoe
c. noun classifiers = material/essence categories
an [ANIMAL] deer, the [ROCK] cave, [MAN] John
d. verbal classifiers = several types of profiles possible
I-[LONG RIGID]-put the knife on the table (physical category)
you-[DOMESTIC PET]-have a dog (functional category)
he-[POTATO]-ate a rotten potato (material category)
127 Craig 1986a; Senft 2000; Aikhenvald 2003.
128 McGregor 2002.
129 Grinevald & Seifart 2004: 243-285.
130 Grinevald 2000: 72.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

47

In all of the above cases, whether the classifier appears with a numeral (a), in a
possessive construction (b), or on a noun (c) or a verb (d), it is important to note that
the classifier always classifies a noun. Hence, our use of the blanket terms “nominal
classifier systems”131 or “noun classifier systems”132 for all subtypes.
The different classifier system subtypes originally documented in the linguistic
literature are evidenced in languages around the world. The better known “numeral
classifiers” are found in Asian languages, while “possessive classifiers” are first
described in Pacific languages. “Noun classifiers” (as in c above), which are
interesting here because of their close resemblance to parts of the Egyptian system,
were identified very recently and remain a rare type, mostly known from native
American133 and Australian languages.134
1.3

A more recently described type: The classifier systems of verbs

Linguistic studies of classifiers have only recently revealed the existence of yet
another type of classifiers, named verb classifiers. Contrary to verbal classifiers, verb
classifiers do not classify nominal arguments of the verb but the verbs themselves,
with corresponding semantics (action, locution, movement, being or existing, etc.)
incorporated. The main regions of the world in which these classifiers have been
identified so far are Australia and parts of America. The contrast between verbal (a)
and verb classifiers (b) is outlined below. In example (a) the classifier, even if
attached to the verb, refers to the knife, while in (b) the classifier categorizes the verb
itself.
a. verbal CL (classifier of patient object)
I [LONG RIGID]-put a knife on the table
b. VERB CL (classifier of verb semantics)
put-[DO] a knife on the table!
you shout-[SAY] to me

1.4

The Egyptian system: A different system of classifiers yet again

The Egyptian system represents a system not described as yet, since it combines in
one system both noun and verb classifier systems, which it resembles by their respective semantics and morphosyntax. In addition, the Egyptian system also applies to
other word categories, such as adverbs and adpositions, which are not known to be
part of any other attested classifier systems in the world.

131 Grinevald 2000.
132 Aikhenvald 2003.
133 Craig 1986a & 1986b.
134 Sands 1995.

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

48

2

Principles of classification: Different levels of categorization

Classifiers are also studied in terms of the different categorizing relations they hold
with the elements they classify. Several levels and types of relationships have been
identified across the classifier systems of the world.135
2.1

Levels of categorization

While most classifiers head classes contain any number of items in a taxonomic relation to them, others define larger or smaller classes, of more or fewer items. The
following labels have been given in the literature to classifiers in order to define the
scope of classification:
unique (c) << specific (b) << general (a) >> default (d)
[a] a general classifier categorizes at the taxonomic level, and includes any number
of items, for example, a general classifier for animals or plants can classify any
animal — or plant — related terms (and plant matter objects), while
[b] a specific classifier defines a smaller class, for instance, a particular class of
plants and their derived products.
[c] a unique classifier, on the other hand, heads a class of just one item, such as one
special animal (for example, the elephant or the tiger in some South Asian classifier
systems, or the locust in the Egyptian script).
[d] a default classifier, at the other extreme, is a classifier with no particular semantic
classifying value, but can replace other classifiers under certain circumstances. A default classifier could be translated as a “thing” (or in French “un truc, un machin,” or
even a “whatchamacallit” in colloquial American English). This classifier is derived
from a more specific one, for example, the default classifier in Chinese comes from
the specific classifier for bamboo).136

2.2

Special types of classifiers (1): The case of repeaters

It is common in the classifier systems of oral languages for some of the classifiers to
be similar to some nouns in that language. In this case, the classifiers are called
“repeater classifiers,” as first defined by Allan. 137 The repeater in its function as
classifier usually shows signs of grammaticalization, such as the loss of stress,
semantics, or the shortening of form, since the repeater can function as a general or
specific classifier. Below are Jakaltek examples of repeater classifiers, some are still
in full noun form (a, a’), while others show shortening by either (b) the loss of a
syllable or (b’) the loss of the last glottal stop (marked ’):
a

CL
ix
[ADULT FEMALE]

N
ix
woman

a’

CL
N
ch’en
ch’en
[ROCK/METAL/GLASS] rock

b

CL
naj
[ADULT MALE]

N
winaj
man

b’

CL
te
[PLANT/WOOD]

135 Grinevald 2004.
136 Kammerzell recently identified the “papyrus roll”
script, see Kammerzell forthcoming.
137 Allan 1977.

N
te’
tree

as a [DEFAULT] classifier in the Egyptian

What are “Determinatives” good for?

2.3

49

Special types of classifiers (2): The case of “phonetic classifiers”

Some languages have been shown to possess “phonetic classifiers”, i.e. classifying
elements that have no semantic content in that they simply repeat part of the sound
material of the word they classify (if they repeated the whole word they would be
“repeaters” and would have semantic content).
One such language with phonetic classifiers is the Movima of Bolivia, discussed
by Grinevald.138 In the Movima system, the majority of the nouns are classified by
mechanically reproducing the last syllable of native nouns, (as in a-a’). Interestingly,
this language is sensitive to loanwords, for which the classifying element is always
two syllables long (as in b-b’), by either repeating the last two syllables of the loanword (for camisa ‘shirt’) or by reduplication of the last syllables of disyllabic words
(for mesa ‘table’):
Nb-CL Noun
Native words:
a. oy-d’o chad’o ‘2 plates’ a’ oy-pi sukapi ‘2 belts’
Borrowed words: b. oy-misa kamisa ‘2 shirts’ b’ oy-sasa mesa ‘2 tables’

3

About the Jakaltek (Mayan) system of noun classifiers

The classifier system of Jakaltek Popti’, a Mayan language of Guatemala, has been
argued repeatedly by Grinevald (Craig)139 to be a typologically rare system, distinct
from the better known numeral classifier systems. She referred to this system as a
“noun classifier system” on the basis of its use with bare nouns (independent of
quantification or possession).
As demonstrated by Craig,140 the Jakaltek Popti’ language offers an interesting insight into the Jakaltek culture of centuries past. There are many parallels between this
Amerindian system and the Egyptian system of classification, and in what follows,
their shared basic principles of categorization will be discussed.
3.1

Principles of classification

The semantic profile of the Jakaltek Popti’ system corresponds to categorization by
the material or essence of the element being classified. Interestingly, the traditional
system described in the 1970s did not classify items of unknown origins (such as
Coca Cola, beer, and plastic items).
3.2

Levels of categorization

All the levels of categorization mentioned above are found in the Jakaltek system, as
shown by the sampling of classifiers given below (with a sampling of the 24 classifiers of the system):
General classifiers:
ANIMAL: – cats (but not dogs; see uniques below!), horses, cows, pigs, snakes,
birds, flies, etc.
– items made of animal matter: meat, eggs, milk,
138 Grinevald 2002.
139 See Craig 1986b & 1987; Grinevald 2000 in particular.
140 Craig 1986b.

50

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

– and manufactured items: leather sandals141, woollen blankets
PLANT:

– all kinds of trees and plants, but not corn! (see specific below)
– also: drinks of plant matter like coffee or herbal medicinal infusions
– and manufactured items: houses, furniture, spoons, books

ROCK:

– rock, cave
– items made of rock, like grinding stones
– by extension: all items made of glass, such as bottles, glasses,
and of metal, such as knives, guns, metal dishware, cars, airplanes, etc.

Specific classifier:
CORN

– (distinct from general plant) for corn plants of differents species and
stages of growth
– foods and drinks made of corn (tortillas, tamales, atole, etc.)

The following are illustrations of the special cases of repeaters in Jakaltek (a phonological characteristic) and uniques (a categorization characteristic), demonstrating that
these are different concepts and that all logical combinations of the two can be found
in the Jakaltek language. See below repeaters that are also unique (a, a’), uniques that
are not repeaters (b) and repeaters that are not unique (c, c’, c’’):
Repeater / Unique CL
a. +
+
atz’am
salt
a’ +
+
q’a’
fire
b. +
metx’
dog
c. +
ix
woman
ix
woman
ix
woman
c’ +
ha
water
ha
water
ha
water
c’’ +
te
plant142

N
atz’am
salt
q’aq’
fire
tx’i’
dog
ix
woman
malin
Mary
q’opoj
girl
ha’
water
nhab’
rain
pam
lake
te’
tree

‘(the) salt’
‘the/a fire’
‘the/a dog’
‘the/a woman’
‘Mary’
‘the/a girl’ , etc….
‘the water’
‘the rain’
‘the/a lake’
‘the/a tree’

141 This category closely parallels in the Egyptian system the classifier [HIDE &TAIL] which classifies two clusters: 1. [“MADE OF HIDE”] and 2. [QUADRUPED]. This category defined by the slowly
extends to include birds, reptiles, and even fish, thus functioning more as the category for
[ANIMAL]. However, this category is a covert category in the Egyptian world organization, as there
is not a single word in the Egyptian lexicon that embraces the concept [ANIMAL]. For a detailed
discussion, see Goldwasser 2002: 57-89.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

te
plant
te
plant
te’
plant

51

nhah
house
‘the house’
hum
paper/book ‘the/a piece of paper, book’
kape
coffee
‘coffee (plant or drink) etc…

Bibliography
Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 2003. Classifiers: A Typology of Noun Categorization Devices, Oxford
Oxford University Press.
Allan, Keith. 1977. Classifiers, in: Language 53, 285-311.
Allen, James P. 2000. Middle Egyptian: An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs,
Cambridge & New York, Cambridge University Press.
Allon, Niv. 2007. Seth is Baal — Evidence from the Egyptian Script, in: Ägypten und Levante 17, 1522.
––––. 2010. At the Outskirts of a System: Classifiers and Word Dividers in Foreign Phrases and Texts,
in: Lingua Aegyptia 18, 9-14.
Blackman, Aylward Manly. 1932. Middle-Egyptian Stories, Bibliotheca Aegyptiaca 2, Bruxelles,
Fondation Égyptologique Reine Élisabeth.
Brein, Georg. 2009. Root Incompatibilities in the Pyramid Texts, in: Lingua Aegyptia 17, 1-8.
Champollion, Jean Francois. 1836. Principes généraux de l'écriture sacrée égyptienne, Paris, institut
d’Orient/Michel Sidhom.
ýerný, Jaroslav & Sarah Israelit Groll. 1984. A Late Egyptian Grammar, 3 ed., Rome, Biblical Institute
Press.
Craig, Colette (ed.). 1986a. Noun Classes and Categorization. Proceedings of a Symposium on
Categorization and Noun Classification, Eugene, Oregon, October 1983, Typological studies in
language, Amsterdam & Philadelphia, John Benjamins.
––––. 1986b, Jacaltec Noun Classifiers: A Study in Language and Culture, in: Colette Craig (1986a).
––––. 1987. Jacaltec Noun Classifiers: A Study in Grammaticalization, in: Lingua 71, 241-284.
––––. 1990. Los clasificadores de nombre en Jacalteco: una innovación k’anjobalana, in: Nora England
& Stephen R. Elliott (eds.), Lecturas sobre la lingüística maya, Antigua (Guatemala), CIRMA,
253-268.
Croft, William. 1994. Semantic Universals in Classifier Systems, in: Word 45, 145-171.
David, Arlette. 2000. De l'infériorité à la perturbation : l'oiseau du « mal » et la catégorisation en
Égypte ancienne, Göttinger Orientforschungen IV/38, Classi¿cation and Categorization in Ancient
Egypt 1, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz.
Davies, Norman de Garis & Seymour de Ricci. 1908. The Rock Tombs of El Amarna: Tombs of
Parennefer, Tutu, and Aÿ, London, Egypt Exploration Society.
Denny, J. Peter. 1976. What are Noun Classifiers Good for?, in: Proceedings of the 12th Regional
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, 453-471.
––––. 1986. The Semantic Role of Noun Classifiers, in: Colette Craig 1986a, 297-308.
Dixon, Robert M. W. & Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (eds.). 2006. Adjective Classes: A Cross-Linguistic
Typology, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
DZA = Digitales Zettelarchiv der Arbeitsstelle Altägyptisches Wörterbuch an der BerlinBrandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. http://aaew.bbaw.de/tla/servlet/TlaLogin.
Faulkner, Raymond O. 1962. A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, Oxford, Griffith Institute.
Gardiner, Alan Henderson. 1957. Egyptian Grammar, Being an Introduction to the Study of Hieroglyphs, 3rd rev. ed., Oxford.

142 This classifier already has a more general meaning than its source noun; while the noun te’ means
tree, the classifier te refers to all types of plant matter, and object made of wood. For a similar
development in the Egyptian classifier system, see Goldwasser 2002: 39-41.

52

Orly Goldwasser & Colette Grinevald

Givón, Talmy. 2001. Syntax: An Introduction 1, Amsterdam & Philadephia, John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Goldwasser, Orly. 1995. From Icon to Metaphor: Studies in the Semiotics of the Hieroglyphs, Orbis
Biblicus et Orientalis 142, Fribourg, 103-106.
––––. 1999. The Determinative System as a Mirror of World Organization, in: Göttinger Miszellen 170,
49-68.
––––. 2002. Prophets, Lovers and Giraffes: Wor(l)d Classification in Ancient Egypt, Göttinger
Orientforschungen IV/38, Classi¿cation and Categorization in Ancient Egypt 3, Wiesbaden,
Harrassowitz.
––––. 2005. Where is Metaphor?: Conceptual Metaphor and Alternative Classification in the
Hieroglyphic Script, in: Metaphor and Symbol 20/2, 95-113.
––––. 2006a. A Comparison Between Classifier Languages and Classifier Script: the Case of Ancient
Egyptian, in: Gideon Goldenberg & Ariel Shisha-Halevy (eds.), A Festschrift for Hans Jakob
Polotsky, Jerusalem, Magnes Press,16-39.
––––. 2006b. On a New Definition of Classifier Languages and Classifier Scripts, in: Lingua Aegyptia
14, 473-484.
––––. 2006c. The Essence of Amarna Monotheism, in: Gerald Moers et al. (eds.), jn.t Dr.w Festschrift
für Friedrich Junge, Göttingen, Seminar für Ägyptologie und Koptologie, 267-279.
––––. 2009. La force de l’icône – le ‘signifié élu’, in: Nathalie Beaux, Bernard Pottier & Nicolas
Grimal (eds.), Image et conception du monde dans les écritures figuratives. Actes du colloque
Collège de France – Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, AIBL-Soleb, 336-354.
––––. 2010. The Aten is the ‘Energy of Light’: New Evidence from the Script, in: JARCE 46, 159-164.
––––. 2011. The Dream of Haremhab — Evidence from the Script (Presented at the conference: A
Symposium and a Lecture on Haremhab: General and King of Egypt, New-York, The
Metropolitan Museum of Art, May 5-6 2011).
––––. 2012. The Advantage of Cultural Periphery: The Invention of the Alphabet in Sinai ca. 1850
B.C.E., in: Rakefet Sela-Sheffy & Gideon Toury (eds.), Culture Contacts and the Making of
Cultures: Papers in Homage to Itamar Even-Zohar, Tel-Aviv, Tel Aviv University – Unit of
Culture Research.
Grinevald, Colette. 2000. A Morphosyntactic Typology of Classifiers, in: Gunter Senft (ed.), Systems
of Nominal Classification, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 50-92.
––––. 2002. Nominal Classification in Movima, in: Mily Crevels et al. (eds.), Current studies on South
American indian languages: Selected papers from the 50th International Congress of Americanists
in Warsaw and the Spinoza Workshop on Amerindian Languages in Leiden (Indigenous languages
of Latin America [ILLA]), Leiden, Research School of Asian, African, and Amerindian Studies,
216-239.
––––. 2004. Classifiers, in: Geert Booij et al. (eds.), Morphology: An International Handbook on
Inflection and Word-Formation, article 97.
––––. A Fieldwork Squib, in: Jorge Hankamer WebFest, http://ling.ucsc.edu/Jorge/ grinevald.html.
Grinevald, Colette & Frank Seifart. 2004. Noun Classes in African and Amazonian Languages, in:
Linguistic Typology 8, 243-285.
Haspelmath, Martin. 2010. Comparative Concepts and descriptive categories in Cross-Linguistic
Studies, in: Language 86/3: forthcoming.
Heine, Bernd & Tania Kuteva. 2002. World Lexicon of Grammaticalization, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Kammerzell, Frank. 1995. Zur Umschreibung und Lautung, in: Rainer Hannig, Großes Handwörterbuch Ägyptisch-Deutsch (2800-950 v. Chr.), Kulturgeschichte der antiken Welt 64, Mainz: von
Zabern, XXIII-LIX (2., unveränderte Auflage 1997).
––––. 2005. Old Egyptian and Pre-Old Egyptian: Tracing linguistic diversity in Archaic Egypt and the
creation of the Egyptian language, in: Stephan J. Seidlmayer (ed.), Texte und Denkmäler des
ägyptischen Alten Reiches, Thesaurus Linguae Aegyptiae 3, Berlin: Achet, 165-247.
––––. Forthcoming. Egyptian Verb Classifiers, Panagiotis Kousoulis & Nikolaos Lazaridis (eds.),
Proceedings of the Tenth International Congress of Egyptologists. University of the Aegean,
Rhodes, 22-29 May 2008, Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta, Leuven: Peeters.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live by, Chicago & London, University of
Chicago Press.

What are “Determinatives” good for?

53

Lincke, Eliese-Sophia. 2011. Die Prinzipien der Klassifizierung im Altägyptischen, Göttinger Orientforschungen IV/38, Classi¿cation and Categorization in Ancient Egypt 6, Wiesbaden, Harrasowitz.
Luiselli, Maria, M. 2004. Der Amun-Re Hymnus des P. Boulaq 17 (P. Kairo 58038), Wiesbaden,
Harrasowitz.
McGregor, William B. 2002. Verb Classification in Australian Languages, Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter.
Mithun, Marianne. 1984. The Evolution of Noun Incorporation, in: Language 60/4, 847-894.
Naville, Edouard. 1894-1898. The Temple of Deir el Bahari IV, London, Egypt Exploration Fund.
Newman, John (ed.). 2002. The Linguistics of Sitting, Standing, and Lying, Studies in Typological
Linguistics 51, Amsterdam & Philadelphia, John Benjamins.
Parkinson, Richard B. 1991. The Tale of the Eloquent Peasant, Oxford, Griffith Institute.
Petrie, William Matthew Flinders. 1902. Abydos, London, Egypt Exploration Fund.
Peust, Carsten. 1999. Egyptian phonology. An introduction to the phonology of a dead language,
Monographien zur Ägyptischen Sprache 2, Göttingen: Peust & Gutschmidt Verlag.
––––. 2008. Adjektiv und Adjektivverb im Mittelägyptischen, in: Carsten Peust (ed.), Miscellanea in
honorem Wolfhart Westendorf, Göttinger Miszellen, Beihefte 3, Göttingen, 58-82.
Polis, Stéphane. 2012. Linguistic Variation in Ancient Egyptian: Genres and registers in the scribal
repertoire of Amennakhte son of Ipuy during the 20th Dynasty, in: Jeniffer Cromwell and Eitan
Grossman (eds.), Beyond Free Variation. Scribal Repertoires from Old Kingdom to Early Islamic
Egypt, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Rappaport Hovav, Malka, Edit Doron & Ivy Sichel (eds.). 2010. Lexical Semantics, Syntax, and Event
Structure, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Regulski, Ilona. 2010. A Palaeographic Study of Early Writing in Egypt, Peeters, Leuven.
Reintges, Christoph Hanns. 1994. Egyptian Root-and-Pattern Morphology, in: Lingua Aegyptia 4, 213244.
Roehrig, Catharine H., Renée Dreyfus & Cathleen A. Keller (eds.). 2005. Hatshepsut: from Queen to
Pharaoh, New-York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Rude, Noel. 1986. Graphemic Classifiers in Egyptian Hieroglyphics and Mesopotamian Cuneiform, in:
Colette Craig (ed.), Noun Classes and Categorization: Proceedings of a Symposium on
Categorization and Noun Classification, Amsterdam & Philadelphia, John Benjamins Publishing
Company, 133-138.
Sands, Kristina. 1995. Nominal classification in Australia, in: Anthropological Linguistics 37, 247-346.
Schenkel, Wolfgang. 1990. Einführung in die altägyptische Sprachwissenschaft, Darmstadt, Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Senft, Gunter. 2000. What Do We Really Know about Nominal Classification Systems?, in: Gunter
Senft (ed.), Systems of Nominal Classification, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 11-49.
Shalomi-Hen, Racheli. 2006. The Writing of Gods. The Evolution of Divine Classi¿ers in the Old Kingdom, Göttinger Orientforschungen IV/38, Classi¿cation and Categorization in Ancient Egypt 2,
Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz.
Siewierska, Anna. 2004. Person, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Stauder, Andréas. 2010. The Earliest Egyptian Writing, in: Christopher Woods (ed.), Visible Language,
The Invention of Writing, Chicago, Oriental Institute, 137-148.
Urk. = Kurt Sethe (1906-1933), Urkunden der 18. Dynastie, Leipzig, J.C. Hinrichs.
Van Valin, Robert D. 2001. An Introduction to Syntax, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Vernus, Pascal. 1983. Écriture du rêve et écriture hiéroglyphique, in: Littoral 7/8, 27-32.
––––. 2003. Idéogramme et phonogramme à l’épreuve de la figurativité: les intermittences de
l’homophonie, in: Lucia Morra & Carla Bazzanella (eds.), Philosophers and Hieroglyphs, Torino,
Rosenberg & Sellier, 205-212.
––––. 2009. Le préformant n et la détransitivité. Formation nC1C2C1C2 versus C1C2C1C2. À propos
de la racine ¥gm « notion de trituration »,in: Lingua Aegyptia 17, 291-317.
Wierzbicka, Anna. 1996. Semantics: Primes and Universals, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Winand, Jean. 2006. Temps et aspect en égyptien: une approche sémantique, Probleme der Ägyptologie 25, Leiden, Brill.
Žába, ZbynČk. 1956. Les maximes de Ptahhotep, texte, traduction et commentaires, Prague, Academie
Tchécoslovaque des Sciences.
Ziffer, Irit. 1990. At that Time the Canaanites Were in the Land: Daily Life in Canaan in the Middle
Bronze Age 2, 2000-1550 BCE, Tel-Aviv, Eretz Israel Museum.

