# Memphite Theology (Shabaka Stone)

Source: Lichtheim translation via academic sources.
Date: claims Old Kingdom origin (~2700 BCE?), surviving copy ~700 BCE.
The god Ptah creates through heart and tongue.

1. The gods who came into being in Ptah.
2. There took shape in the heart, there took shape on the tongue, the form of Atum.
3. For the very great one is Ptah, who gave [life] to all the gods and their Kas
4. through this heart and through this tongue,
5. in which Horus had taken shape as Ptah, in which Thoth had taken shape as Ptah.
6. Thus heart and tongue rule over all the limbs
7. in accordance with the teaching that it is in every body and it is in every mouth
8. of all gods, all men, all cattle, all creeping things, whatever lives,
9. thinking whatever it wishes and commanding whatever it wishes.
10. His Ennead is before him as teeth and lips. They are the semen and the hands of Atum.
11. For the Ennead of Atum came into being through his semen and his fingers.
12. But the Ennead is the teeth and the lips in this mouth which pronounced the name of every thing,
13. from which Shu and Tefnut came forth, and which gave birth to the Ennead.
14. {The eyes'} seeing, {the ears'} hearing, {the nose's} breathing {of air}; they report to the heart,
15. and it {is what} makes every understanding come forth.
16. As to the tongue, it repeats what the heart has devised.
17. He (Ptah) is the one who made all the gods, (also) Atum and his Ennead.
18. For every {hieroglyph} came about through what the heart devised and the tongue commanded.
19. Thus all the {male life-principles} were made and all the {female life-principles} determined they that make all foods and all provisions,
20. through this word {that makes} what is loved {and} what is hated.
21. Thus life is given to the peaceful, death is given to the criminal.
22. Thus all labor, all crafts are made, the action of the hands, the motion of the legs, the movements of all the limbs,
23. according to this command which is devised by the heart and comes forth on the tongue and creates the performance of every thing.
24. Thus it is said of Ptah: 'He who made all and created the gods'.
25. And he is Ta-tenen, who gave birth to the gods, and from whom every thing came forth,
26. foods, provisions, divine offerings, all good things.
27. He is (also) Thoth, the Wise, whose power is greater than that of the (other) gods.
28. So has Ptah come to rest after his making everything and every {hieroglyph} as well,
29. He gave birth to the gods, He made the towns, He established the nomes,
30. He placed the gods in their shrines, He settled their offerings,
31. He established their shrines, He made their bodies according to their wishes.
32. Thus the gods entered into their bodies, of every wood, every stone, every clay,
33. every thing that grows upon him in which they came to be.
34. Thus were gathered to him all the gods and their Kas, content, united with the Lord of the Two Lands.
